
NEWS INSIDE 
• 
Upcoming November 19 Core Team Cascades to Coast Landscape Collaborative meeting in Portland, Oregon 

• 
Collaborative Launches Speaker Forums 

• 
Designing for Resilience - Status of our Spatial Design 

• 
Wildlife Connectivity Updates 

• 
Outcomes of the Chehalis and Warrenton Workshops 

• 
Cascades to Coast Landscape Collaborative Member 


ship Question 
Fall 2019 

Newsletter 
www.ctoclc.org 
Register to Attend the November 19 Core Team Meeting in Portland, OR 
The Cascades to Coast Landscape Collaborative Core Team Meeting will be held at the Columbia River Inter-tribal Fisheries Commission building at 700 NE Multnomah St, Portland, OR 97232, should register online here. Check here for the latest agenda. 
The focus of the meeting will be shar­ing initial maps that were developed by three stakeholder-based mapping teams that identi­fied data sets and criteria to represent values for working lands, ecosystem services, and conservation. Attendees will review the criteria and draft maps, add their perspectives, and then work in breakout groups to identify po­tential strategies to enhance resilience on the landscape based on the identified values. 
We’ll also be providing updates on our sub-regional workshops and community meet­ings, our new speaker forums, wildlife habitat connectivity efforts, and our new branding. 


Collaborative Launches Speaker Forums 
The Collaborative is launching a speaker forum in NW Oregon and SW Washington focused on topics of in­terest to farm and forest landowners. The first event will feature Washington Department of Fish and Wild­life’s Farm Bill Coordinator Mike Kuttel, Jr., who will share information about vountary incentives available 
to SW Washington forest landowners that will help to maintain and improve forest health while also pro­
viding benefits to forest landowners, including financial incentives and assurances of regulatory certainly. Following Mike’s talk, attendees will discuss ways of improving existing incentives for working farms and forests as well as ideas for upcoming speaker series topics. Mike and representatives from local Conserva­tion Districts will discuss eligibility requirements, how to enroll, benefits offered to enrollees, etc. The half-day events will occur: 
•
 October 17 – Longview at Lower Columbia College 

•October
 18 – Mason County PUD in Shelton, 


•October 19 – South Bend at the Willapa Harbr Community Center.  Click HERE to register.  All attendees receive a complimentary coffee and a country breakfast.  A series of forums are being planned for NW Oregon, and will be announced soon. 
Oregon Wildlife Connectivity Update 
Work is underway on the Oregon Connectivity Assessment and Map­ping Project (OCAMP), which aims to map habitat connectivity and identify priority movement and migration corridors for up to 60 of Oregon’s terrestrial wildlife species by June of 2022. Following a collaborative spe­cies selection workshop in spring of 
2019, eight species were selected to represent the varied habitat types of Oregon’s Coast Range ecoregion— Pacific-slope flycatcher, snowy plo­ver, wrentit, northern flying squirrel, American beaver, coastal marten, Townsend’s chipmunk, and north­ern red-legged frog. As initial model building and testing begins for these 
species, work will proceed to select species to represent the habitat types 
in the remaining ecoregions in the state. Interested contributors will be given an opportunity to score candi­date species on a variety of criteria, such as mobility, susceptibility to a range of anthropogenic threats, and data availability. Following scoring, workshops will be held in a variety 
of locations throughout the state for 
participants to convene and finalize species selection (teleconference op­tions will be available for those who are unable to travel). If you are inter­ested in contributing to the species 
selection process, or would just like to receive project updates as OCA­MP progresses, please reach out to Rachel Wheat, at or 503-947-6141, or 
Rachel.E.Wheat@state.or.us, 



Spatial Design for Multiple Values 
A key outcome  of our project is to visualize a resilient landscape for a subset of values in the region:  1) biolog­ical conservation, 2) working farms and forests, and 3) “ecosystem services”.  Ecosystem services are benefits we reap from functioning ecosystems, such as drinking water, carbon storage, recreation, and cultural values.  
We are convening experts into three teams to map 
elements of these three values.  These teams are iden­
tifying key values and potential existing data sets that represent them.  Experts from Columbia River Estuary Study Taskforce, Yakama Tribe, Conservation Biology In­stitute, Sustainable Northwest, University of Washington, Greenwood Resources, Hampton Lumber, Port Blakely, Brown Family Tree Farm, Cafferata Consulting, Washing­ton Department of Transportation, US Fish and Wildlife Resources, Institute for Natural Resources, and Conserva­tion Planning Institute met in a series of meetings in late August 2019 to identify key attributes to map. 
Next, we will identify GIS data sets that represent our shared values and develop a rapid prototype using a con­servation planning tool called Marxan.  We will work with 
our stakeholders until we develop  a version of a map that stakeholders believe accurately represents conser­vation, working farms and landscapes, and ecosystem 
services priorities and values on the landscape. 
Our product will not be a static map. Rather, during the next year, we will refine as we develop better data sets 
and incorporate other values important to people living in the region. Key to our initial success is  articulating val­ues that can be used as landscape design elements.  We are starting a process that is collaborative and inclusive 
of multiple perspectives. It’s never too late to engage, so if you’re interested in contributing,  Please contact Tom Miewald, thomas_miewald@fws.gov, to be a part of the 
process. 

We’ve Got a Question for You! 
Since the launch of the Collabo­
rative, more than 600 individuals and organizations have partic­ipated in webinars, core team meetings, community meetings, workshops, and ad hoc commit­tees to advance key outcomes of 
this initiative. 
It’s time to update our lists and ensure we are listing your or­ganization correctly on our new website, www.ctoclc.org. 
You have two options: 
• Be a member of our list-serv, and receive occasional 
updates and announcements on Collaborative progress. 
• Be listed as a partner orga­nization on our website (see https://www.ctoclc.org/part­ner-network). You will be in­cluded on our listserv as well 
as be listsed as an official 
partner of the Collaborative. 
If you received this newsletter via email, you are already a member of our listserv. If you would like to join the listserv, go 
to www.ctoclc.org and click on 
the Join Us link. 
To be listed as a partner orga­
nization on our website, please send an email to Lisa DeBruy­ckere at lisad@createstrat.com, and you’ll be confirmed and/or 
added as a partner to our web­site. 

Moving from Concepts to Actions in Northwest Oregon 
In late July, representatives from a cross-section of 
the interest groups that participated in the Warren-
ton Community Meeting met for a half-day meeting to help turn the results that community meeting into 
potential actions the CCLC partnership could support to advance the goals for working lands and conser­
vation in NW Oregon. The group first refined the list of shared landscape values.  Then, for those values, the group clarified a list of challenges or barriers to  achieving those values. Lastly, a list of strategies and actions were discussed and prioritized as steps to be­gin addressing some of the identified challenges. 
The list of shared landscape values included keep­ing working lands working; managing for long-term 
sustainability; supporting vibrant rural communities; facilitating inter-generational farm/forest ownership; water security for people, farms, fish and wildlife; and, restoring and maintaining biodiversity and healthy resilient ecosystems. Several challenges to the val­ues were discussed, including the lack of landowner incentives, technical support, and funding; regulatory 
burdens; development encroachment; uncertainties from climate change; barriers to inter-generational transfer of farms/forests; loss of timber and agricul­ture infrastructure; and lack of innovation and market 
diversification. Many in the room also pointed to the challenge posed by evaporating social compact – peo­ple losing interest in working together to promote a common vision for the future of this region. 
Many strategies and actions to address these chal­lenges were discussed and captured in the meeting notes. The actions that seemed to have strongest support for moving forward in the near-term includ­
ed: convening partners in NW Oregon on a regular 
basis to build relationships and support collaboration; identifying and producing a directory of other collab­oratives in the region; supporting a discussion forum on topics of regional interest such as farm transition planning, ESA tools for landowners, economic diver­
sification, etc.; exploring the use of the NRCS Regional Conservation Partnership Program to fund 
regional conservation and working land’s needs; and creating a master guide to incentives.  
People left the meeting with a better understanding of the CCLC collaborative; general consensus on values/challenges/actions we should consider; and a desire to continue these collaborative conver­sations. The long-term future of the rich and abundant natural and cultural resources in NW Oregon are too important to be left to chance. 
Thanks to the meeting participants to their hard work and thoughtful contributions, and thanks to GreenWood Resources for hosting the meeting. When the meeting notes are finalized they will be 
available on the CCLC web site. 
Workshops in Chehalis, WA and Warrenton, OR Advance Understanding of Stakeholder Values in Region 
The Collaborative hosted two workshops—November 1-2, 2018 in Chehalis, Washington, and March 12, 2019 in Warrenton, Oregon. These “Working Lands and Conservation” community meetings sought to identify conservation and land use values, identify positive efforts and current and emerg­ing challenges to landscape-scale conservation, and identify key questions and information to inform potential strategies to support working landscapes, conservation, and ecosystem services goals in the region. Participants included federal, state, and local government agency representatives, large and small forest landowners, large and small agricultural landowners, conservation representatives, 
and individuals associated with recreation and tourism industries. 
Panel discussions and breakout groups identified numerous topics of mutual interest across partic­ipants, including sustaining working lands, maintaining a multi-generational perspective, voluntary approaches to conservation, strong working relationships, excellent communications, a stable and reasonable regulatory environment, improved social license to operate, approaches to avoiding litigation, building trust while stengthening relationships, working toward a set of shared working lands and conservation goals, healthy resilient ecosystems, economic viability of working farms and forests, vibrant and sustainable rural communities, and biodiversity. 
Attendees identifed key stressors to the region, including development, climate change, shrinking social license to perate, barriers to inter-generational transfer of lands and business, inadquate in­centive program and technical support, limited market access an an aging infrastructure, disruption of critical ecological processes, and loss of biodiversity. 
Key Takeaways from the Workshops: 
• 
We must understand and move forward together both working lands and conservation values. 

• 
To be successful in achieving wildlife habitat connectivity, we must understand and plan for other landscape values in an integrated manner, with comparable emphasis and detail. 


Each one of us can make a difference. Together can can make change. ~ Barbara Milulski 



